---
title: "How Facebook went all in on AI"
date: '2023-11-14' 
---

 The first effort at sorting, eventually branded “EdgeRank,” was a simple formula that prioritized content according to three principal factors: a post’s age, the amount of engagement it got, and the interconnection between user and poster. The platform’s recommendation systems were still in their infancy, but the dissonance between users’ vocal disapproval and avid usage led to an inescapable conclusion inside the company: regular people’s opinions about Facebook’s mechanics were best ignored. By 2010, the company was looking to move beyond EdgeRank’s crude formula to recommend content based on machine learning, a branch of artificial intelligence focused on training computers to design their own decision-­ making algorithms. A Spaniard who grew up in Morocco, Quiñonero was living in the UK and working on artificial intelligence at Microsoft in 2011 when friends scattered across Northern Africa began talking excitedly about social media–­ driven protests. Advances in machine learning and raw computing speed allowed the platform to not only pigeonhole users into demographic niches (“single heterosexual woman in San Francisco, late twenties, interested in camping and salsa dancing”) but to spot correlations between what they clicked on and then use that information to guess which ads they would find relevant. Poorly designed algorithms meant to reward good healthcare penalized hospitals that treated sicker patients, and models purporting to quantify a parole candidate’s risk of reoffending turned out to be biased in favor of keeping Black people in jail. An avid user of FB Learner would later describe machine learning’s mass diffusion inside Facebook as “giving rocket launchers to twenty-­ five-­ year-­ old engineers.” But at the time, Quiñonero and the company spoke of it as a triumph. By the time machine learning experts began to arrive at Facebook, the list of questions that classifiers sought to answer had grown well past “Is it spam?,” thanks in large part to people like LeCun. By 2016, he was predicting that classifiers would surpass human capacities of perception, recognition, and comprehension within the next five to ten years, allowing the company to shut down misbehavior and make huge leaps in connecting the world. Within five years of announcing that it was beginning to use machine learning to recommend content and target ads, Facebook’s systems would rely so heavily on AI capable of training itself that, without the technology, Yann LeCun proudly declared, all that would be left of the company’s products would be “dust.”

